[DOCS-5689] Update Jenkins on AWS tutorial (#5240)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/tutorials/tutorial-for-installing-jenkins-on-AWS.adoc

:imagesdir: ../../book/resources/

Jenkins is an open-source automation server that integrates with a number of

> AWS Services such as: AWS CodeCommit, AWS CodeDeploy, Amazon EC2 Spot, and Amazon EC2 Fleet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWS Services, including: AWS CodeCommit, AWS CodeDeploy, Amazon EC2 Spot, and Amazon EC2 Fleet.
```

> You can use Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) to deploy a Jenkins application on AWS in a matter of minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) to deploy a Jenkins application on AWS.
```

In this tutorial, you will perform the following steps:

. <<Prerequisites>>.
. <<Creating a key pair,Create a key pair>> using Amazon EC2.
If you already have one, you can skip to step 3.
. <<Creating a security group,Create a security group>> for your Amazon EC2 instance. If you already have one, you can skip to step 4.
. <<Launching an Amazon EC2 instance,Launch an Amazon EC2 instance>>.
. <<Installing and configuring Jenkins,Install and configure Jenkins>>.
. <<Cleaning up,Clean up tutorial resources>>.

== Prerequisites

. An *AWS account*. If you don't have one, you can register link:https://portal.aws.amazon.com/billing/signup#/start[here].
. An Amazon EC2 key pair. If you don't have one, refer to <<Creating a key pair>>.

== Creating a key pair

> Creating a key pair will help ensure that the correct form of authentication is used when installing Jenkins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Creating a key pair helps ensure that the correct form of authentication is used when you install Jenkins.
```

To create your key pair:

. Open the Amazon EC2 console at https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/ and sign in.

. In the navigation pane, under *NETWORK & SECURITY*, select *Key Pairs*.

. Select **Create key pair**.

. For *Name*, enter a descriptive name for the key pair.
Amazon EC2 associates the public key with the name that you specify as the *key name*. 
A key name can include up to 255 ASCII characters.
It cannot include leading or trailing spaces.

. For *File format*, select the format in which to save the private key.

> * To save the private key in a format that can be used with OpenSSH, select *pem*.
> * To save the private key in a format that can be used with PuTTY, select *ppk*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For OpenSSH compatibility, select *pem*.
* For PuTTY compatibility, select *ppk*.
```

. Select *Create key pair*.

> . The private key file is downloads automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. The private key file downloads automatically.
```

The base file name is the name you specified as the name of your key pair, and the file name extension is determined by the file format you chose.
Save the private key file in a safe place.
+
IMPORTANT: This is the only chance for you to save the private key file.
+
. If you use an SSH client on a macOS or Linux computer to connect to your Linux instance, run the following command to set the permissions of your private key file so that only you can read it.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ chmod 400 <key_pair_name>.pem
----

NOTE: If you do not set these permissions, you cannot connect to your instance using this key pair. For more information, refer to link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/TroubleshootingInstancesConnecting.html#troubleshoot-unprotected-key[Error: Unprotected private key file].

== Creating a security group

A security group acts as a firewall that controls the traffic allowed to reach one or more EC2 instances.
When you launch an instance, you can assign it one or more security groups.

> You add rules to each security group that control the traffic allowed to reach the instances in the security group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You add rules that control the traffic allowed to reach the instances in each security group.
```

> You can make modifications to the rules for a security group any time, and the new rules take effect immediately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can modify a security group's rules any time, and the new rules take effect immediately.
```

For this tutorial, you will create a security group and add the following rules:

* Allow inbound HTTP access from anywhere.
* Allow inbound SSH traffic from your computer's public IP address so you can connect to your instance.

To create and configure your security group:

. Decide who may access your instance.
For example, a single computer or all trusted computers on a network.
For this tutorial, you can use the public IP address of your computer.
* To find your IP address, use the
link:http://checkip.amazonaws.com/[check IP service tool] from AWS3 or search for the phrase "what is my IP address" in any search engine.
* If you connect through an ISP or from behind your firewall without a static IP address, you will need the range of IP addresses used by client computers.
If you don't know this address range, you can use 0.0.0.0/0 for this tutorial.
+
IMPORTANT: This is unsafe for production environments because it allows everyone to
access your instance using SSH.

. Sign in to the link:https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/[AWS Management Console].

> . Open the Amazon EC2 console by selecting *EC2* under Compute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Open the Amazon EC2 console by selecting *EC2* under *Compute*.
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/create_security_group.png[Amazon security group creation screen]

. In **Security group name**, enter *WebServerSG* or any preferred name of your choice, and provide a description.
. Select your VPC from the list. You can use the default VPC.
. On the **Inbound tab**, add the rules as follows:
.. Select *Add Rule*, and then select *SSH* from the Type list.
.. Under *Source*, select *Custom*, and in the text box, enter <<Decide who may access your instance,the IP address from step 1>>.
.. Select *Add Rule*, and then select *HTTP* from the Type list.
.. Select *Add Rule*, and then select *Custom TCP Rule* from the
Type list.
.. Under *Port Range*, enter *8080*.
. Select Create.

For more information, refer to link:http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/using-network-security.html[Security Groups] in the Amazon EC2 User Guide for
Linux Instances.

== Launching an Amazon EC2 instance

Now that you have configured a key pair and security group, you can launch an EC2 instance.

To launch an EC2 instance:

. Sign in to the the link:https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/[AWS Management Console].

> . Open the Amazon EC2 console by selecting EC2 under Compute.
> . From the Amazon EC2 dashboard, select Launch Instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Open the Amazon EC2 console by selecting EC2 under *Compute*.
. From the Amazon EC2 dashboard, select *Launch Instance*.
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_launch_instance.png[Launching from Amazon]

. The *Choose an Amazon Machine Image (AMI)* page displays a list of basic configurations called Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) that serve as templates for your instance.
Select the HVM edition of the *Amazon Linux AMI*.
+
NOTE: This configuration is marked *Free tier eligible*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_choose_ami.png[Choosing an Amazon Machine Image]

. On the *Choose an Instance Type* page, the *t2.micro* instance is selected by default.

> Keep this instance type to stay within the free tier. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Verify this instance type is selected to stay within the free tier. 
```

Once chosen, you can select *Review and Launch*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_choose_instance_type.png[Amazon instance type]

. On the *Review Instance Launch* page, select *Edit security groups*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_review_instance_launch.png[Review your amazon launch instance]

> . On the Configure Security Group page:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. On the *Configure Security Group* page:
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/select_key_pair.png[Selecting a key pair for Amazon]

. In the left-hand navigation bar, choose **Instances** to view the status of your instance.
Initially, the status of your instance is pending.
After the status changes to running, your instance is ready for use.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_view_created_instance.png[Amazon view created instance]

== Installing and configuring Jenkins

Now that the Amazon EC2 instance has been launched, Jenkins can be installed properly.

In this step you will deploy Jenkins on your EC2 instance by completing the following tasks:

. <<Connecting to your Linux instance>>
. <<Downloading and installing Jenkins>>
. <<Configuring Jenkins>>

=== Connecting to your Linux instance

After you launch your instance, you can connect to it and use it the same way as your local machine.

Before you connect to your instance, get the *public DNS* name of the instance using the Amazon EC2 console.

. Select the instance and locate Public DNS.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_public_dns.png[Amazon public DNS]

> NOTE: If your instance doesn't have a public DNS name, open the VPC console, select the VPC, and check the Summary tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: If your instance doesn't have a public DNS name, open the VPC console, select the VPC, and check the *Summary* tab.
```

If either DNS resolution or DNS hostnames is *no*, select *Edit* and change the value to *yes*.

==== Prerequisites

The tool that you use to connect to your Linux instance depends on your operating system.

* If your computer runs Windows, you will connect using PuTTY.
* If your computer runs Linux or Mac OS X, you will connect using the SSH client.

These tools require the use of your key pair.
Be sure that you have created your key pair as described in <<Creating a key pair>>.

==== Using PuTTY to connect to your instance

. From the *Start* menu, select *All Programs* > *PuTTY* > *PuTTY*.

> . In the Category pane, select *Session*, and complete the following fields:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the *Category* pane, select *Session*, and complete the following fields:
```

In this tutorial, you will perform the following steps:

> 1. <<Prerequisites>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<Prerequisites>>.
```

> 2. <<Creating a key pair,Create a key pair>> using Amazon EC2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<Creating a key pair,Create a key pair>> using Amazon EC2.
```

If you already have one, you can skip to step 3.

> 3. <<Creating a security group,Create a security group>> for your Amazon EC2 instance. If you alreadyhave one, you can skip to step 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<Creating a security group,Create a security group>> for your Amazon EC2 instance. If you already have one, you can skip to step 4.
```

> 4. <<Launching an Amazon EC2 instance,Launch an Amazon EC2 instance>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<Launching an Amazon EC2 instance,Launch an Amazon EC2 instance>>.
```

> 5. <<Installing and configuring Jenkins,Install and configure Jenkins>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<Installing and configuring Jenkins,Install and configure Jenkins>>.
```

> 6. <<Cleaning up,Clean up tutorial resources>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. <<Cleaning up,Clean up tutorial resources>>.
```

== Prerequisites

1. An *AWS account*, if you don't have one, you can register link:https://portal.aws.amazon.com/billing/signup#/start[here].

> 2. An Amazon EC2 key pair, if you don't have one, see the <<Creating a key pair>> section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. An Amazon EC2 key pair. If you don't have one, refer to <<Creating a key pair>>.
```

== Creating a key pair

Creating a key pair will help ensure that the correct form of authentication is used when installing Jenkins.

To create your key pair:

. Open the Amazon EC2 console at https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/ and sign in.

. In the navigation pane, under *NETWORK & SECURITY*, choose *Key Pairs*.

. Select **Create key pair**.

. For *Name*, enter a descriptive name for the key pair.
Amazon EC2 associates the public key with the name that you specify as the *key name*. 
A key name can include up to 255 ASCII characters.
It cannot include leading or trailing spaces.

> . For *File format*, choose the format in which to save the private key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. For *File format*, select the format in which to save the private key.
```

> * To save the private key in a format that can be used with OpenSSH, choose *pem*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To save the private key in a format that can be used with OpenSSH, select *pem*.
```

> * To save the private key in a format that can be used with PuTTY, choose *ppk*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To save the private key in a format that can be used with PuTTY, select *ppk*.
```

. Select *Create key pair*.

> . The private key file is automatically downloaded by your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The private key file is downloads automatically.
```

The base file name is the name you specified as the name of your key pair, and the file name extension is determined by the file format you chose.
Save the private key file in a safe place.
+
IMPORTANT: This is the only chance for you to save the private key file.
+

> . If you will use an SSH client on a macOS or Linux computer to connect to your Linux instance, use the following command to set the permissions of your private key file so that only you can read it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If you use an SSH client on a macOS or Linux computer to connect to your Linux instance, run the following command to set the permissions of your private key file so that only you can read it.
```

+
[source,bash]
----
$ chmod 400 <key_pair_name>.pem
----

NOTE: If you do not set these permissions, then you cannot connect to your instance using this key pair. For more information, see link:https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/TroubleshootingInstancesConnecting.html#troubleshoot-unprotected-key[Error: Unprotected private key file].

== Creating a security group

A security group acts as a firewall that controls the traffic allowed to reach one or more EC2 instances.
When you launch an instance, you can assign it one or more security groups.
You add rules to each security group that control the traffic allowed to reach the instances in the security group.

> Modificaions to the rules for a security group can be made at any time and the new rules take effect immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can make modifications to the rules for a security group any time, and the new rules take effect immediately.
```

For this tutorial, you will create a security group and add the following rules:

* Allow inbound HTTP access from anywhere.

> * Allow inbound SSH traffic from your computer's public IP address so that you can connect to your instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allow inbound SSH traffic from your computer's public IP address so you can connect to your instance.
```

To create and configure your security group:

. Decide who may access your instance.
For example, a single computer or all trusted computers on a network.
For this tutorial, you can use the public IP address of your computer.
* To find your IP address, use the

> link:http://checkip.amazonaws.com/[check IP service tool] from AWS3 or search for the phrase "what is my IP address" in any internet search engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:http://checkip.amazonaws.com/[check IP service tool] from AWS3 or search for the phrase "what is my IP address" in any search engine.
```

> * If you are connecting through an ISP or from behind your firewall without a static IP address, you will need to find the range of IP addresses used by client computers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you connect through an ISP or from behind your firewall without a static IP address, you will need the range of IP addresses used by client computers.
```

If you don't know this address range, you can use 0.0.0.0/0 for this tutorial.
+
IMPORTANT: This is unsafe for production environments because it allows everyone to
access your instance using SSH.

. Sign in to the link:https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/[AWS Management Console].

> . Open the Amazon EC2 console by choosing *EC2* under Compute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Open the Amazon EC2 console by selecting *EC2* under Compute.
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_service.png[Amazon EC2 Services page]

> . In the left-hand navigation bar, choose **Security Groups**, and then click *Create Security Group*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the left-hand navigation bar, select **Security Groups**, and then select *Create Security Group*.
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/create_security_group.png[Amazon security group creation screen]

> . In **Security group name** enter *WebServerSG* or any preferred name of your choice and provide a description.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In **Security group name**, enter *WebServerSG* or any preferred name of your choice, and provide a description.
```

> . Choose your VPC from the list, you can use the default VPC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select your VPC from the list. You can use the default VPC.
```

. On the **Inbound tab**, add the rules as follows:

> .. Click *Add Rule*, and then choose *SSH* from the Type list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Select *Add Rule*, and then select *SSH* from the Type list.
```

> .. Under *Source*, select *Custom* and in the text box enter <<Decide who may access your instance,the IP address from step 1>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Under *Source*, select *Custom*, and in the text box, enter <<Decide who may access your instance,the IP address from step 1>>.
```

> .. Click *Add Rule*, and then choose *HTTP* from the Type list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Select *Add Rule*, and then select *HTTP* from the Type list.
```

> .. Click *Add Rule*, and then choose *Custom TCP Rule* from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Select *Add Rule*, and then select *Custom TCP Rule* from the
```

Type list.

> .. Under *Port Range* enter *8080*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Under *Port Range*, enter *8080*.
```

> . Click Create.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Select Create.
```

For more information, refer to link:http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/using-network-security.html[Security Groups] in the Amazon EC2 User Guide for
Linux Instances.

== Launching an Amazon EC2 instance

> Now that a key pair and security group have been configured, it is time to launch an EC2 instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have configured a key pair and security group, you can launch an EC2 instance.
```

To launch an EC2 instance:

. Sign in to the the link:https://console.aws.amazon.com/ec2/[AWS Management Console].

> . Open the Amazon EC2 console by choosing EC2 under Compute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Open the Amazon EC2 console by selecting EC2 under Compute.
```

> . From the Amazon EC2 dashboard, choose Launch Instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. From the Amazon EC2 dashboard, select Launch Instance.
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_launch_instance.png[Launching from Amazon]

. The *Choose an Amazon Machine Image (AMI)* page displays a list of basic configurations called Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) that serve as templates for your instance.
Select the HVM edition of the *Amazon Linux AMI*.
+
NOTE: This configuration is marked *Free tier eligible*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_choose_ami.png[Choosing an Amazon Machine Image]

. On the *Choose an Instance Type* page, the *t2.micro* instance is selected by default.
Keep this instance type to stay within the free tier. 
Once chosen, you can select *Review and Launch*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_choose_instance_type.png[Amazon instance type]

> . On the *Review Instance Launch* page, click *Edit security groups*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *Review Instance Launch* page, select *Edit security groups*.
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_review_instance_launch.png[Review your amazon launch instance]

. On the Configure Security Group page:
.. Select *Select an existing security group*.
.. Select the *WebServerSG* security group that you created.
.. Select *Review and Launch*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/select_security_group.png[Amazon security group selection]

> . On the *Review Instance Launch* page, click *Launch*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the *Review Instance Launch* page, select *Launch*.
```

Initially, the status of your instance is pending.
After the status changes to running, your instance is ready for use.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_view_created_instance.png[Amazon view created instance]

== Installing and configuring Jenkins

Now that the Amazon EC2 instance has been launched, Jenkins can be installed properly.

In this step you will deploy Jenkins on your EC2 instance by completing the following tasks:

. <<Connecting to your Linux instance>>
. <<Downloading and installing Jenkins>>
. <<Configuring Jenkins>>

=== Connecting to your Linux instance

After you launch your instance, you can connect to it and use it the same way as your local machine.

Before you connect to your instance, get the *public DNS* name of the instance using the Amazon EC2 console.

. Select the instance and locate Public DNS.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_public_dns.png[Amazon public DNS]

NOTE: If your instance doesn't have a public DNS name, open the VPC console, select the VPC, and check the Summary tab.
If either DNS resolution or DNS hostnames is *no*, select *Edit* and change the value to *yes*.

==== Prerequisites

> The tool that you use to connect to your Linux instance depends on the operating system running on your computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tool that you use to connect to your Linux instance depends on your operating system.
```

* If your computer runs Windows, you will connect using PuTTY.
* If your computer runs Linux or Mac OS X, you will connect using the SSH client.

These tools require the use of your key pair.
Be sure that you have created your key pair as described in <<Creating a key pair>>.

==== Using PuTTY to connect to your instance

> . From the *Start* menu, choose *All Programs* > *PuTTY* > *PuTTY*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. From the *Start* menu, select *All Programs* > *PuTTY* > *PuTTY*.
```

. In the Category pane, select *Session*, and complete the following fields:
.. In *Host Name*, enter ec2-user@public_dns_name.
.. Ensure that *Port* is 22.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/ec2_putty.png[Amazon EC2 PuTTY selection]

. In the *Category* pane, expand *Connection*, expand *SSH*, and then select *Auth*. Complete the following:
.. Select *Browse*.
.. Select the .ppk file that you generated for your key pair, as
described in <<Creating a key pair>> and then select *Open*.
. Select *Open* to start the PuTTY session.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/putty_select_key_pair.png[Selecting and opening a new PuTTY session]

==== Using SSH to connect to your instance

. Use the ssh command to connect to the instance.
You will specify the private key (.pem) file and ec2-user@public_dns_name.
+
[source,bash]
----
$ ssh -i /path/my-key-pair.pem ec2-user@ec2-198-51-
100-1.compute-1.amazonaws.com
----
+

> You will see a response like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will receive a response like the following:
```

[ec2-user ~]$ sudo systemctl status jenkins
----

=== Configuring Jenkins

Jenkins is now installed and running on your EC2 instance.
To configure Jenkins:

> . Connect to \http://<your_server_public_DNS>:8080 from your favorite browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Connect to \http://<your_server_public_DNS>:8080 from your browser.
```

You will be able to access Jenkins through its management interface:
+
image::tutorials/AWS/unlock_jenkins.png[Unlock Jenkins screen]

. As prompted, enter the password found in */var/lib/jenkins/secrets/initialAdminPassword*.

.. Use the following command to display this password:
+
[source,bash]
----
[ec2-user ~]$ sudo cat /var/lib/jenkins/secrets/initialAdminPassword
----

. The Jenkins installation script directs you to the *Customize Jenkins page*.
Click *Install suggested plugins*.

. Once the installation is complete, the *Create First Admin User* will open.

> Enter in your information and select *Save and Continue*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enter your information, and then select *Save and Continue*.
```

+
image::tutorials/AWS/create_admin_user.png[Create your first admin user.]

. On the left-hand side, select *Manage Jenkins*, and then select *Manage
Plugins*.
. Select the *Available* tab, and then enter *Amazon EC2 plugin* at the top
right.
. Select the checkbox next to *Amazon EC2 plugin*, and then select *Install
without restart*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/install_ec2_plugin.png[Jenkins Plugin Manager showing available plugins.]

. Once the installation is done, select *Back to Dashboard*.
. Select *Configure a cloud*.
+
image::tutorials/AWS/configure_cloud.png[Jenkins Dashboard showing configure a cloud.]

. Select *Add a new cloud*, and select *Amazon EC2*.
A collection of new fields appears.
. Fill out all the fields. You will have to *add credentials* of the kind
*AWS Credentials*.

You are now ready to use EC2 instances as Jenkins agents.

== Cleaning up

After completing this tutorial, be sure to delete the AWS resources that you

> created so that you do not continue to accrue charges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
created so you do not continue to accrue charges.
```

=== Deleting your EC2 instance

> . In the left-hand navigation bar of the Amazon EC2 console, choose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the left-hand navigation bar of the Amazon EC2 console, select
```

*Instances*.

> . Right-click on the instance you created earlier and select *Terminate*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Right-click on the instance you created earlier, and select *Terminate*.
```
